adr: node initialization (#6562)
tendermint/tendermint: docs/architecture/adr-069-flexible-node-intitalization.md

# ADR 069: Flexible Node Initialization

> 

Reviewer: Missing changelog and status. See ADR-065 for a good example.

## Context

In an effort to support [Go-API-Stability](./adr-060-go-api-stability.Md),
during the 0.35 development cycle, we have attempted to reduce the total size
of the API surface area by moving most of the interface of the `node` package
into unexported functions, as well as moving the reactors to an `internal`
package. Having this coincide with the 0.35 release made a lot of sense
because these interfaces were _already_ changing as a result of the `p2p`
[refactor](./adr-061-p2p-refactor-scope.md), so it made sense to think a bit
more about how tendermint exposes this API.

It is not immediately intuitive that the nexus of this change is in the
relationship between the `rpc` package and the `node` package, particularly
with regards to how the node instances are started. However, this is indeed
the case and the existing dependencies are tangled around supporting these
cases.

## Observations

> To prepare for this work I've been playing in [this

Reviewer: Try to keep it third person :)

s/I've/we've
s/My/Our

branch](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/tree/tychoish/scratch-node-minimize),
with the node implementation to see if, without making major
modifications or changing interfaces, what aspects could be
simplified. My conclusions, generally: 

> - the implementation of the `node` service, doesn't really need the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The implementation of the `node` service, doesn't really need the
```

  ability to introspect the implementations of reactors in most
  cases.

> - the exception to this, is the cluster of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The exception to this, is the cluster of
```

  consensus/statesync/blockhain (which depend on eachother,) because

>   `node` itself contains some of their specific initialization logic.

Reviewer: I'm not sure I understand why needing to make that distinction is necessary. All these reactors are services as they fulfill the `Service` interface, and they're also all processes in that they do "something".

>   `node` itself contains some of their specific initialization logic.

Author: I think bez is correct, though it's true that in order for the "catchup feature" (pause consensus, run fastsync, switch to consensus) those services need to "know" about each other, in a way that makes the fastsync parts effectively part of consensus (from the perspective of the node.) 

This isn't hard/bad, it just means the service-based view of the node doesn't mirror the code organization as well as it does for the other reactors.

>   `node` itself contains some of their specific initialization logic.

Reviewer 2: Because making these distinctions makes it easier to reason about starting a tendermint node. You run the necessary processes (and by processes I mean a task that has a predefined termination clause) until it lets the node that it is finished and that we have reached the desired state and then you run all services. This way reactors don't need to worry when one is finished or not; the node takes care of orchestrating all that.

>   `node` itself contains some of their specific initialization logic.

Reviewer: Right, but those processes are run by services...

>   `node` itself contains some of their specific initialization logic.

Reviewer 2: Yeah they could be - depending on how we wanted to design it. Unlike other reactors like mempool, evidence and consensus where you're just gossiping data, blockchain and statesync have more one way data flows where a peer is either requesting data from you or providing data for you hence we could define a process as something that constantly requests data until it's finished and a service as a something that continuously provides data for peers (just thinking aloud)

>   `node` itself contains some of their specific initialization logic.

Author: @cmwaters I think this mostly makes sense, and I don't think that it's incompatible  with any of the work discussed here, but it does feel more expansive/larger in scope than what I think we need to accomplish in the next few weeks in support of 0.35.

> - while the RPC environment construction happens in `node`, this can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- While the RPC environment construction happens in `node`, this can
```

👌

  happen early during `node` construction rather than at
  initialization time, which reduces the need for the implementation
  of the node object to track this state.

Ideally, it seems like a node instance should be expressable simply as
a list of `service.Services` and any knowledge of the internals of any
of these services could be limited to their constructors. I sketched
out a generic and simple `groupService` implementation, to handle a
desecrate stage or sequence of services.  As some services have
dependencies during construction or initialization and as a starting
point, a cluster of dependencies can be wrapped as a single
`service.Service`.

## Goals

- Provide a more flexible internal framework for initializing tendermint
  nodes to make the initatilization process less hard-coded by the
  implementation of the node objects. 
  
  - Reactors should not need to expose their interfaces *within* the
    implementation of the node type, except in the context of some groups of

>     service. 

Author: I've referenced the blockchain/consensus/mempool/statesync dependency throughout the document. There aren't any other strict dependency chains (though there might be initialization order constraints that function like a dependency.) This is the *main* inter-dependency at the moment. 

There are also, initialization order constraints, hard compilation requirements (x package imports y package), and soft/transiet compilation requirements (x package uses an interface defied in y package but implemented in z package), and I don't know that I'd be confident (or trust) any of these analyses without doing a rather lot of exploratory work (that's roughly like the actual work of the project/effort.)

>     service. 

Author: thanks to @williambanfield, this is done.

- Expose some "unsafe"  way of replacing (some?) existing components, and or
  inserting arbitrary reactors or services into the tendermint node's
  initialization.
  
  - This may include creating an exported, top-level "unsafe" package with
    several interfaces and constructors, or simply a function in the
    node package. 

- Refactor and simplify the process start/initialization logic,
  separately from--but as a precursor to--permitting user replacement
  of components.

## Non-Goals

- Fully abstract dependency-based process initialization. 

- Fully abstract replacement of core tendermint components without vendoring.

> - Parallelized initialization of components.

Reviewer: I don't know what any of these mean tbh. Also, there isn't a need for a newline between points.

We need a markdown linter @marbar3778 :)

Author: I think it improves readability, particularly with nested bulleted lists.

Also there is a markdown linter in the superlinter, and this seems to pass.

Reviewer 3: I love it when people include non-goals in design docs! But like Bez, I'm not really sure what these mean. I have some guesses, and I _think_ I agree with them (esp. #2), but it would be best if you just elaborate/clarify instead.

## Questions

- To what extent does this new initialization framework need to accommodate
  the legacy p2p stack? Would it be possible to delay a great deal of this

>   work to the 0.36 cycle to avoid this complexity? 

Reviewer 2: I don't think it would be much of a problem to delay till the 0.36 since a lot of this new initialisation framework is still internal.

Author: Agreed. I think the question may be more "do we think we can ship 0.35 without a pluggable/replaceable mempool?)

Reviewer 3: +1. Do we have a list of users who are relying on custom mempools? Maybe @marbar3778 knows?

  
- There's clear and common interest in injecting some kind of mempool, and
  intuitively this makes sense as the highest priority.
  

>   - Does the existing `mempool.Mempool` interface make sense to expose and

Reviewer 4: I would advocate for creating a reduced interface, there is implementation details that leak in that interface.

    commit to, or should we make a smaller interface? 
    

>   - Is it reasonable for users to bring their own mempool without bringing

Reviewer 4: I was for this at first, but the more I read mempool I realized having the data structure be specific to a reactor is the right approach. If a team wants to write a mempool data structure, they should also write the reactor. This would be better than the developer using our reactor and unknown data structure, then coming to ask questions. This way, its a change it out, it's your problem not ours scenario.

Author: I think I don't have much of an opinion on this and think we could go either way, with the following notes:

- the `mempool.Mempool` interface is referenced in the `BlockExecutor` in `state`, so we need to find some way for `state` to be able to interface with user-provided memopols. 
-  similarly, this interface gets used by the RPC layer, and I'm not sure how much of that functionality actually depends on the mempool and what we should continue to support.

I'm not really lobbying for either, and it might end up being "both" in a way that's less deslireabe.

Reviewer 4: So the current interface is both for a pluggable mempool data structure into the reactor and to be used in the repo. I would vote for only be used in the repo by other pkgs. The plugability of the mempool DS into the reactor should no be an option imo. The interface it coupled to the implementation anyways as well.

Reviewer 4: > I see from the comment below that we want to support replacing of the mempool reactor only. This makes sense to me as far as a starting point. We can address the support of other reactors in future releases.

agree with this. We should quickly touch base with teams like oasis that replace state sync.

Reviewer 2: They just add a custom state provider because they use a gRPC light client. I talked to them about having a p2p state provider and they said they'd be okay with using that instead

Author: > agree with this. We should quickly touch base with teams like oasis that replace state sync.

We have/are, and there's ongoing communication with them.

>  I talked to them about having a p2p state provider and they said they'd be okay with using that instead

Is this work scoped/planned elsewhere that we can reference?

Reviewer 2: > Is this work scoped/planned elsewhere that we can reference?

https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/issues/6491

I'm looking at getting it in for 0.35 if possible (although I think it could be possible to do in 0.36 and backport to 0.35.1 if it came to it). I just want to get state sync in a "nice" place before I swap out the provider with the p2p one.

Reviewer 3: Totally agree with the conclusions reached in this thread :+1: 

Will think about how to prioritize the P2P state provider for this release

Author: I've noted the p2p state provider in my revision, which I think mostly cover this thread.

    their own reactor?

- Are there reactors, other than the mempool, that make sense to support
  ad-hoc replacing (e.g. statesync, blockchain (fastsync),) and if so should
  we provide any first-class support for this?

> - There's a dependency (and nearly a cycle), between consensus,

Reviewer 4: until or if we refactor consensus we should not allow to exchange it because it is so tightly woven into the repo it could cause unknown issues.

Author: Yeah, I think this is in general the argument for not implementing or providing plugability at this juncture.

Reviewer 4: I would say this mainly applies to consensus. The mempool could be replaced with little to no issue.

  blockchain (fastsync), which makes it very hard to allow meaningful
  injection of any of these components without allowing injection of
  all of them (statesync provider as a
  possible exception.) Is this acceptable? 

## Future Work

> - Improve or simplify the `service.Service` interface. There are some

Reviewer 4: this sounds really good!!

Reviewer 2: Also agree here

  pretty clear limitations with this interface as written (there's no
  way to timeout slow startup or shut down, the cycle between the

>   `servbice.BaseService` and `service.Service` implementations is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  `service.BaseService` and `service.Service` implementations is
```

  intuitively this makes sense as the highest priority.
  
  - Does the existing `mempool.Mempool` interface make sense to expose and
    commit to, or should we make a smaller interface? 
    
	- Answer: _yes_, smaller mempool interface is better. 

  - Is it reasonable for users to bring their own mempool without bringing
    their own reactor?
	
	- Answer: _probably not_, but this might be a function of how the
      current implementations work and can be refactored. 

- Are there reactors, other than the mempool, that make sense to support
  ad-hoc replacing (e.g. statesync, blockchain (fastsync),) and if so should
  we provide any first-class support for this?

  - Answer: _defer_. Certainly this shouldn't be attempted until after
    there is a refactor of the consensus reactor. Is more likely than
    block/fast sync. 

- There's a dependency (and nearly a cycle), between consensus,
  blockchain (fastsync), which makes it very hard to allow meaningful
  injection of any of these components without allowing injection of
  all of them (statesync provider as a possible exception.) Is this
  acceptable?
  

>   - Answer: _yes_. 

Reviewer 2: > and therefore it's not just startup order (as you model, I think correctly,) but also import/initialization order related.

right but if you fix the start up phases then none of these reactors need to have any dependency/reference to another; it's all managed by the node.

>  and nodes can move between "doing fastsync" and "doing consensus" if the node starts lagging.

This is a bit of a special case. The consensus reactor needs to signal to the node somehow that it's falling behind so that the node can stop it and briefly start up fast sync. As a caveat, this needs to only happen if the node operator has set fast sync to true. AFACIS, Either:
- The node needs to gain information on the height that it is at and the height that it's peers are at and from this information make the decision on whether to switch.
- The node needs to listen on the consensus reactor's `Quit()` channel (see `service.Service`) for when the consensus "gives up" and the node must switch to fast sync to catch up

>   - Answer: _yes_. 

Author: I think because this dependency related to consensus and bootstrapping (fast sync or otherwise) is not a footnote/edge case but actually the common case.

>   - Answer: _yes_. 

Reviewer 2: Well currently it's not possible to fallback into fast sync so there's no case for it at the moment. I called it a special case because unlike the other start up processes where the node just runs it and awaits for it to be complete, here the node must monitor the state of the consensus reactor and make a decision. Hence, whilst the others may be more straight forward, adding this feature requires more sophisticated orchestration.

>   - Answer: _yes_. 

Reviewer 5: Chiming in to say that I strongly agree that the node or some external control structure should handle the orchestration between fastsync and consensus. Personally I'd prefer to have the orchestrator be aware of height and kill consensus when it's too far behind to keep the responsibility of consensus as simple as possible (when running, try to produce block)

  pretty clear limitations with this interface as written (there's no
  way to timeout slow startup or shut down, the cycle between the
  `service.BaseService` and `service.Service` implementations is
  troubling, the default panic in `OnReset` seems troubling.)

- Support explicit dependencies between components and allow for
  parallel startup, so that different reactors can startup at the same
  time, where possible.

## Proposal / Conclusion 

- Wait for e2e tests to stablize, before changing node initialization.

- Continue building on [the experimental branch
  branch](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/tree/tychoish/scratch-node-minimize)
  to reduce the complexity in the node initialization, and recast
  `nodeImpl` as a list of `service.Service` objects, modulo
  requirements for legacy p2p components which will be deleted.

- Add the ability to construct a tendermint node via a new public
  constructor that will take a list of additional services that will
  either be appended to the end of the node initialization process
  (simple,) or (based on name) replace one of the default services
  (MVP for mempool only.)

> - Move components from `p2p` into `types` to support writing

Reviewer 4: Not a fan of this. We should not defer to types. 

Nit: can we follow the adr template provided in the repo?

Reviewer: 🙏  just move things to `pkg/<domain>` please!

Author: I don't think that removing `types` in favor of `pkg` should be a prerequisite to this project or effort, nor do I think that it's reasonable to expand the scope of the project to cover that work.

I agree that types isn't a good pattern to use, and that we should move away from it, but I'm not sure that it makes sense to tie these projects together given the release schedule/goals. Let me think about it a bit.

Author: I called this out as an open question, and think we should decide on that separately from this ADR, though I think it impacts a few of the later-stage questions.

# ADR 069: Flexible Node Initialization

## Changlog

- 2021-06-09: Initial Draft (@tychoish)

## Status 

Proposed. 

## Context

In an effort to support [Go-API-Stability](./adr-060-go-api-stability.Md),
during the 0.35 development cycle, we have attempted to reduce the total size
of the API surface area by moving most of the interface of the `node` package
into unexported functions, as well as moving the reactors to an `internal`
package. Having this coincide with the 0.35 release made a lot of sense
because these interfaces were _already_ changing as a result of the `p2p`
[refactor](./adr-061-p2p-refactor-scope.md), so it made sense to think a bit
more about how tendermint exposes this API.

It is not immediately intuitive that the nexus of this change is in the

> relationship between the `rpc` package and the `node` package, particularly

Reviewer 3: Can you either explain this a bit more or link to a code sample/line number that illustrates this?

the case and the existing dependencies are tangled around supporting these
cases.

## Observations

To prepare for this work [this
branch](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/tree/tychoish/scratch-node-minimize)
contains some experimentation with the node implementation to see if,
without making major modifications or changing interfaces, what
aspects could be simplified. To summarize, generally:

- The implementation of the `node` service, doesn't really need the
  ability to introspect the implementations of reactors in most
  cases.

- The exception to this, is the cluster of
  consensus/statesync/blockhain (which depend on eachother,) because
  `node` itself contains some of their specific initialization logic.

- While the RPC environment construction happens in `node`, this can
  happen early during `node` construction rather than at
  initialization time, which reduces the need for the implementation
  of the node object to track this state.

Ideally, it seems like a node instance should be expressable simply as
a list of `service.Services` and any knowledge of the internals of any
of these services could be limited to their constructors. There is a

> sketch of a generic and simple `groupService` implementation, to handle a

Reviewer 3: I agree with the goal here ("it seems like a node instance should be expressable simply as a list of `service.Services` and any knowledge of the internals of any of these services could be limited to their constructors") but I don't understand how the `groupService` can be used to support this. I checked the `scratch-node-minimize` branch and didn't see it in use

Author: I hadn't quite gotten there in my branch to wire things together. I think the `groupService` thing can fall out except in the detailed design.

desecrate stage or sequence of services.  As some services have
dependencies during construction or initialization and as a starting
point, a cluster of dependencies can be wrapped as a single
`service.Service`.

## Goals

- Provide a more flexible internal framework for initializing tendermint
  nodes to make the initatilization process less hard-coded by the
  implementation of the node objects. 
  
  - Reactors should not need to expose their interfaces *within* the
    implementation of the node type, except in the context of some groups of
    service. 

> - Expose some "unsafe"  way of replacing (some?) existing components, and or

Reviewer 3: Big thumbs up on this goal and the following one :+1:

    several interfaces and constructors, or simply a function in the
    node package. 

- Refactor and simplify the process start/initialization logic,
  separately from--but as a precursor to--permitting user replacement
  of components.

## Non-Goals

- Fully abstract dependency-based process initialization. 

- Fully abstract replacement of core tendermint components without vendoring.

- Parallelized initialization of components.

## Questions

- To what extent does this new initialization framework need to accommodate
  the legacy p2p stack? Would it be possible to delay a great deal of this
  work to the 0.36 cycle to avoid this complexity? 
  
  - Answer: _depends on timing_, and the requirement to ship pluggable
    reactors in 0.35. 
  
- There's clear and common interest in injecting some kind of mempool, and
  intuitively this makes sense as the highest priority.
  
  - Does the existing `mempool.Mempool` interface make sense to expose and
    commit to, or should we make a smaller interface? 
    
	- Answer: _yes_, smaller mempool interface is better. 

  - Is it reasonable for users to bring their own mempool without bringing
    their own reactor?
	

> 	- Answer: _probably not_, but this might be a function of how the

Reviewer 3: When this ADR gets updated, it would be nice to include some of the thoughts from the above comment thread in this "answer" section

  blockchain (fastsync), which makes it very hard to allow meaningful
  injection of any of these components without allowing injection of
  all of them (statesync provider as a possible exception.) Is this
  acceptable?
  
  - Answer: _yes_. 

## Future Work

- Improve or simplify the `service.Service` interface. There are some
  pretty clear limitations with this interface as written (there's no
  way to timeout slow startup or shut down, the cycle between the
  `service.BaseService` and `service.Service` implementations is
  troubling, the default panic in `OnReset` seems troubling.)

- As part of the refactor of `service.Service` have all services/nodes
  respect the lifetime of a `context.Context` object, and avoid the
  current practice of creating `context.Context` objects in p2p and
  reactor code. This would be required for in-process multi-tenancy.
  
- Consider additional interfaces that node objects can provide in
  terms of access to components (e.g. the mempool).

- Support explicit dependencies between components and allow for
  parallel startup, so that different reactors can startup at the same
  time, where possible.

> ## Proposal / Conclusion 

Reviewer 4: I'm not entirely sure what this ADR describes as far as the implementation. Usually, ADR's have short excerpts of a proposed design.

  relevant interfaces and types external/exported.

- Prioritize implementation of p2p-based statesync reactor to obviate
  need for users to inject a custom state-sync provider.

## Detailed Design

The [current
nodeImpl](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/master/node/node.go#L47)
includes direct references to the implementations of each of the
reactors, which should be replaced by references to `service.Service`
objects. This will require moving the construction of the [rpc
service](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/master/node/node.go#L771)
into the constructor of
[makeNode](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/master/node/node.go#L126).

In order to prevent adding complexity to the `node` package, this
project will add an implementation to the service `service` package
that implements `service.Service` and is comprised of a sequence of
underlying `service.Service` objects and handles their
startup/shutdown in a consistent order.

Consensus, blocksync (nee fast sync.), and statesync all depend on
each other, and have significant initialization dependencies that are
presently encoded in the `node` package, and as part of this change,

> a new package/component will be added that

Reviewer 4: Unfinished sentence?

In order to support replacement of a component, a new public function
will be added to the public interface of `node` with a signature that
resembles the following:

```go
func NewWithServices(conf *config.Config,
	logger log.Logger,
	cf proxy.ClientCreator,
	gen *types.GenesisDoc,
	srvs ...service.Service
) (service.Service, error) {
```

> The `service.Service` objects will be initialized in the order their

Reviewer 4: looks like some extra ` exists somewhere.

  Related to the general project of API stabilization we want to deprecate
  the `types` package, and move its contents into a new `pkg` hierarchy;
  however, the design of the `pkg` interface is currently underspecified.
  If `types` is going to remain for the 0.35 release, then we should consider
  the impact of using multiple organizing modalities for this code within a
  single release.

## Future Work

- Improve or simplify the `service.Service` interface. There are some
  pretty clear limitations with this interface as written (there's no
  way to timeout slow startup or shut down, the cycle between the
  `service.BaseService` and `service.Service` implementations is
  troubling, the default panic in `OnReset` seems troubling.)

- As part of the refactor of `service.Service` have all services/nodes
  respect the lifetime of a `context.Context` object, and avoid the
  current practice of creating `context.Context` objects in p2p and
  reactor code. This would be required for in-process multi-tenancy.

- Support explicit dependencies between components and allow for
  parallel startup, so that different reactors can startup at the same
  time, where possible.

## References

> - [this

Reviewer 6: Unless we are planning to keep this branch around, I'd suggest replacing this reference with a PR link (even if that PR isn't the one that eventually gets submitted) before merging this doc, so that future readers won't wind up pointing to a dead link.

We could also just keep the branch. I generally find branch clutter confusing, but YMMV.

Author: easy enough!

  branch](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/tree/tychoish/scratch-node-minimize)
  contains experimental work in the implementation of the node package
  to unwind some of the hard dependencies between components.

> - [the component

Reviewer 6: I guess this is here because it came up during discussion, but it raises a more vital design principle that might deserve to live under Future Work. Specifically: The idea that dependencies and setup are _not_ systematically hidden behind interfaces and injection, but expressed as concrete straight-line code. I strongly agree with that approach, but following it will likely require us to grapple with some of our dependency relationships, which seem to be a little cross-threaded at the boundary between RPC plumbing and Node setup/run. I do think it's worth keeping that on the radar, but it's a bigger question than this doc needs/wants to answer.

Author: I agree. This came up, and I think it's a good thing to think about in terms of prior art, but I don't think it particularly impacts the decision at this point.

difficult to maintain, it may be viable in the short and medium term
to delay implementation which will allow us to do more product
research and build more confidence and consensus around the eventual
solution.

### Generic Service Plugability

We can imagine a system design that exports interfaces (in the Golang
sense) for all components of the system, to permit runtime dependency
injection of all components in the system so that users can compose
tendermint nodes of arbitrary user supplied components.

This is an interesting proposal, and may be interesting to persue, but
essentially requires doing a lot more API design and increases the
surface area of our API. While this is not a goal at the moment,
eventually providing support for some kinds of plugability may be
useful, so the current solution does not explicitly forclose the
possibility of this alternative.

### Abstract Dependency Based Startup and Shutdown

The proposal on in this document simplifies and makes tendermint node
initialization more abstract, but the system lacks a number of
features which daemon/service initialization might provide, such as a

> dependency based system that allows the authors of services to control

Reviewer 5: I'm not totally sure I know what a dependency based system means, mind clarifying?

Author: I think, as an alternative, you could imagine a system where when you add a service to the node, you specify identifiers of services that it depends on (for initialization) and you could use this information to control the order of service initialization (and also potentially add parallelism.) 

I think it's a bit overwrought for our use case, but it would be "the upgrade pick" if that makes sense.

the initialization and shutdown order of components using an
dependencies to control the ordering.

Dependency based orderings make it possible to write components
(reactors, etc.) with only limited awareness of other components or of
node initialization, and is the state of the art for process
initialization. However, this may be too abstract and complicated, and
authors of components in the current implementation of tendermint
*would* need to know about other components, so a dependency based
system would be unhelpfully abstract at this stage.

> ## Decisions

Author: I think we're basically of the same page here, but maybe it makes sense to talk through some of these points out of band sometime later today, and figure out how we can add the appropriate context to the document.

> ## Decisions

Author: Just to follow up on this for the record, we spoke this afternoon (well my afternoon, time is a lie, etc. etc.) and I've tightened up the language around my "alternative implementation ideas," which I think I perhaps presented *more* favorably than I intended or needed to, and I've changed the language to argue against them

The alternatives are not inherently bad, and I think logical questions that people who consider this work in the future may consider, but the decision I've gone with is pragmatic, and I think the smallest _viable_ step we can make in the right direction that will make a meaningful improvement to the code and our users, and enable us to continue to iterate in the future.

- Provide a more flexible internal framework for initializing tendermint
  nodes to make the initatilization process less hard-coded by the
  implementation of the node objects.

  - Reactors should not need to expose their interfaces *within* the
	implementation of the node type, except in the context of some groups of
	services.

  - This refactoring should be entirely opaque to users.

  - These node initialization changes should not require a
	reevaluation of the `service.Service` or a generic initialization
	orchestration framework.

- If required for the 0.35 release, add an "unsafe" way to construct a
  node service with user-supplied mempool, including making the
  relevant interfaces and types external/exported.

- Prioritize implementation of p2p-based statesync reactor to obviate
  need for users to inject a custom state-sync provider.

## Detailed Design

The [current
nodeImpl](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/master/node/node.go#L47)
includes direct references to the implementations of each of the

> reactors, which should be replaced by references to `service.Service`

Reviewer 6: Are these really all the same interface? I guess today they are, but are they actually the same, or are they just superficially the same because they all share a superset?

objects. This will require moving the construction of the [rpc
service](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/master/node/node.go#L771)
into the constructor of

> [makeNode](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/master/node/node.go#L126).

Reviewer 5: I'm not completely sure what this looks like. Looking at where RPC is initialized currently, I'm definitely concerned about it. It is constructed and initialized within a method on the node. My strong preference is that, to whatever degree possible, the logic for configuring and starting this process be moved _into the RPC package_. 
I would generally advocate for deleting the `ConfigureRPC` and`startRPC` methods from node. How to create and start an RPC server is not its concern. It should instead be passed a constructed RPC server that is ready to run. 

(I would also advocate for changing the way rpc is constructed, but that may be a different discussions for a different time).

My preferred style for constructors of this type is definitely [the component graph](https://peter.bourgon.org/go-for-industrial-programming/#the-component-graph).

Author: Yeah, the `rpc` package is really where this knot falls into. I don't think in this change we can fully realize this goal, but I think we can do a bunch of refactoring to simplify the code.

The work to get the RPC layer to be independent of the `node` package and to be able to interface more abstractly with other components is something that I think we should agree to push out a bit (particularly if we need to get pluggable mempool into 0.35) because I think it's a *huge* amount of work, and while it would be better, I don't think the benefit would justify the work right now.

In order to prevent adding complexity to the `node` package, this
project will add an implementation to the service `service` package
that implements `service.Service` and is comprised of a sequence of
underlying `service.Service` objects and handles their
startup/shutdown in a consistent order.

Consensus, blocksync (nee fast sync.), and statesync all depend on

> each other, and have significant initialization dependencies that are

Reviewer 5: Strongly agree that this is needed!

presently encoded in the `node` package, and as part of this change,
a new package/component will encapsulate the initialization of this

> area of functionality.

Reviewer 5: Mind describing what you had in mind for this? I think some kind of 'BlockOrchestrator' object makes sense here, but I'm wondering if you have ideas for what its responsibilities will be.

Author: I'm mostly imagining that there'll be a new "virtual service" in `internal/blocks` that will encapsulate this dependency cycle/system, and I think could eventually fulfill the role of "block orchestrator".

In order to support replacement of a component, a new public function
will be added to the public interface of `node` with a signature that
resembles the following:

```go
func NewWithServices(conf *config.Config,
	logger log.Logger,
	cf proxy.ClientCreator,
	gen *types.GenesisDoc,

> 	srvs ...service.Service

Reviewer 6: I advise caution about using variadic function signatures in a public API. If it's practical to do so, I'd avoid it.

It's not a correctness issue, but I have found it's harder for future readers to audit the correctness of variadic function call sites, especially when the API changes over time. It also complicates static analysis—or even just grepping for usage. We don't do much static analysis right now, but I would like to be able to: Correctness is really crucial in the consensus plumbing.

I see that we already have several variadic type signatures in this codebase, but I've been bitten by this enough times that I wanted to at least mention it. I would just make this an explicit slice, even if it does mean a little bit of extra typing at the call site.

Author: It's definitely practical. I don't have a strong feeling on the subject, I think as long as the type isn't `interface{}`... but I'm happy to change it.

) (service.Service, error) {
```

The `service.Service` objects will be initialized in the order their
supplied, after all pre-configured/default services have started (and
shut down first, comparatively.) If any of the services implement
additional interfaces, that allow them to replace specific default
services. `NewWithServices` will validate input service lists with the
following rules:

- no running services
- all values of `service.Service.String()` must be unique.

> - for replacing default services, callers cannot supply more than

Reviewer 5: Can you give an example of what this may mean? I think my preference is something more linkenable to what `net.http` does in regards to its `Transport` type. It provides a default transport type:
https://github.com/golang/go/blob/master/src/net/http/transport.go#L43

And when no tansport is set on an object, it uses this default: https://github.com/golang/go/blob/aa4e0f528e1e018e2847decb549cfc5ac07ecf20/src/net/http/client.go#L58-L62

I find this to be a bit more sane than using a system of replacing a component by key or by using reflect. Using reflect or keys to replace components likely mean your API will now require the user to understand the code inside of your constructor and they will also need to right a test to make sure that their type is always correctly loaded in in case they change something about it.

Author: I think we can drop this requirement: this does mean that we'll end up needing to export interfaces *other* than `service.Service` for reactors (which might be required anyway?) which means we'll just have a type switch rather than a switch on the service name, and that's fine.

# ADR 069: Flexible Node Initialization

## Changlog

- 2021-06-09: Initial Draft (@tychoish)

- 2021-07-21: Major Revision (@tychoish)

## Status

Proposed.

## Context

> In an effort to support [Go-API-Stability](./adr-060-go-api-stability.Md),

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
In an effort to support [Go-API-Stability](./adr-060-go-api-stability.md),
```

> during the 0.35 development cycle, we have attempted to reduce the total size
> of the API surface area by moving most of the interface of the `node` package
> into unexported functions, as well as moving the reactors to an `internal`
> package. Having this coincide with the 0.35 release made a lot of sense
> because these interfaces were _already_ changing as a result of the `p2p`
> [refactor](./adr-061-p2p-refactor-scope.md), so it made sense to think a bit
> more about how tendermint exposes this API.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
during the 0.35 development cycle, we have attempted to reduce the the API
surface area by moving most of the interface of the `node` package into
unexported functions, as well as moving the reactors to an `internal`
package. Having this coincide with the 0.35 release made a lot of sense
because these interfaces were _already_ changing as a result of the `p2p`
[refactor](./adr-061-p2p-refactor-scope.md), so it made sense to think a bit
more about how tendermint exposes this API.
```

> While the interfaces of the P2P layer and most of the node package are
> already internalized, this precludes several kinds of operational
> patterns that are important to key tendermint users who use tendermint
> as a library, specifically introspecting the tendermint node service
> and replacing components is not supported in the latest version of the
> code, and some of these use cases would require maintaining a vendor
> copy of the code. Adding these features requires rather extensive
> (internal/implementation) changes to the `node` and `rpc` packages,
> and this ADR describes a model for changing the way that tendermint
> nodes initialize, in service of providing this kind of functionality.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
While the interfaces of the P2P layer and most of the node package are already
internalized, this precludes some operational patterns that are important to
users who use tendermint as a library. Specifically, introspecting the
tendermint node service and replacing components is not supported in the latest
version of the code, and some of these use cases would require maintaining a
vendor copy of the code. Adding these features requires rather extensive
(internal/implementation) changes to the `node` and `rpc` packages, and this
ADR describes a model for changing the way that tendermint nodes initialize, in
service of providing this kind of functionality.
```

We consider node initialization, because the current implemention
provides strong connections between all components, as well as between
the components of the node and the RPC layer, and being able to think
about the interactions of these components will help enable these
features and help define the requirements of the node package.

## Alternative Approaches

### Do Nothing

The current implementation is functional and sufficient for the vast

> majority of use cases (e.g. all users of the Cosmos-SDK as well as

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
majority of use cases (e.g. ,all users of the Cosmos-SDK as well as
```

anyone who runs tendermint and the ABCI application in separate

> processes.) In the current implementation, and even previous versions,

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
processes). In the current implementation, and even previous versions,
```

modifying node initialization or injecting custom components required

> copying most of the `node` package, which amounts to requiring users
> to maintain a vendored copy of tendermint for these kinds of use
> cases.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
copying most of the `node` package, which required such users
to maintain a vendored copy of tendermint.
```

While this is (likely) not tenable in the long term, as users do want
more modularity, and the current service implementation is brittle and
difficult to maintain, in the short term it may be possible to delay
implementation somewhat. Eventually, however, we will need to make the
`node` package easier to maintain and reason about.

> ### Generic Service Plugability

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
### Generic Service Pluggability
```

> We can imagine a system design that exports interfaces (in the Golang

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
One possible system design would export interfaces (in the Golang
```

sense) for all components of the system, to permit runtime dependency

> injection of all components in the system so that users can compose

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
injection of all components in the system, so that users can compose
```

> tendermint nodes of arbitrary user supplied components.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
tendermint nodes of arbitrary user-supplied components.
```

> This is an interesting proposal, and customization would provide
> benefits, this is a huge undertaking particularly with regards to API
> design work, that we do not have scope for at the moment. While this
> is not a goal at the moment, eventually providing support for some
> kinds of plugability may be useful, so the current solution does not
> explicitly forclose the possibility of this alternative.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Although this level of customization would provide benefits, it would be a huge
undertaking (particularly with regards to API design work) that we do not have
scope for at the moment.  Eventually providing support for some kinds of
pluggability may be useful, so the current solution does not explicitly
foreclose the possibility of this alternative.
```

### Abstract Dependency Based Startup and Shutdown

> The proposal on in this document simplifies and makes tendermint node
> initialization more abstract, but the system lacks a number of

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The main proposal in this document makes tendermint node initialization simpler
and more abstract, but the system lacks a number of
```

> features which daemon/service initialization might provide, such as a

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
features which daemon/service initialization could provide, such as a
```

> dependency based system that allows the authors of services to control
> the initialization and shutdown order of components using an
> dependencies to control the ordering.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
system allowing the authors of services to control initialization and shutdown order
of components using dependency relationships.
```

> Such a system would work, by allowing services to declare

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Such a system could work by allowing services to declare
```

initialization order dependencies to other reactors (by ID, perhaps)
so that the node could decide the initialization based on the

> dependencys declared by components rather than requiring the node to

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
dependencies declared by components rather than requiring the node to
```

I'm not sure I understand what  a "component" is in this context—do you mean "declared via application-level configuration settings" perhaps?

encode this logic directly. 

> However, this may be too abstract, complicated, and overwrought, and
> in any case authors of components in the current implementation of
> tendermint *do* need to know about other components, so a dependency
> based system would be unhelpfully abstract at this stage.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
This level of configuration is probably more complicated than is needed.  Given
that the authors of components in the current implementation of tendermint
already *do* need to know about other components, a dependency-based system
would probably be overly-abstract at this stage.
```

## Decisions

> - Provide a more flexible internal framework for initializing tendermint

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- Provide a more-flexible internal framework for initializing tendermint
```

  nodes to make the initatilization process less hard-coded by the
  implementation of the node objects.

>   - Reactors should not need to expose their interfaces *within* the
> 	implementation of the node type, except in the context of some groups of
> 	services.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
  - Reactors should not need to expose their interfaces *within* the
    implementation of the node type, except in the context of some groups of
    services.
```

  - This refactoring should be entirely opaque to users.

>   - These node initialization changes should not require a
> 	reevaluation of the `service.Service` or a generic initialization
> 	orchestration framework.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
  - These node initialization changes should not require a
    reevaluation of the `service.Service` or a generic initialization
    orchestration framework.
```

> - If required for the 0.35 release, add an "unsafe" way to construct a

Reviewer 6: Is it maybe worth noting that this "unsafe" mechanism is intended to be a temporary workaround?

Reviewer 2: Agree. Any custom mempool support we add for the 0.35 series will most likely be temporary and potentially not compliant with future custom mempool support in 0.36 and onwards

  node service with user-supplied mempool, including making the
  relevant interfaces and types external/exported.

- Prioritize implementation of p2p-based statesync reactor to obviate
  need for users to inject a custom state-sync provider.

## Detailed Design

The [current
nodeImpl](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/master/node/node.go#L47)
includes direct references to the implementations of each of the
reactors, which should be replaced by references to `service.Service`

> objects. This will require moving the construction of the [rpc

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
objects. This will require moving construction of the [rpc
```

service](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/master/node/node.go#L771)
into the constructor of
[makeNode](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/master/node/node.go#L126). One

> possible implementation of this would be to climate the current

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
possible implementation of this would be to eliminate the current
```

I'm not positive my suggestion is actually what you intended.

`ConfigureRPC` method on the node package and instead [configure it
here](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/tychoish/scratch-node-minimize/node/node.go#L441). 

> In order to prevent adding complexity to the `node` package, this
> project will add an implementation to the service `service` package

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
To avoid adding complexity to the `node` package, we will add a
composite service implementation to the `service` package
```

> that implements `service.Service` and is comprised of a sequence of

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
that implements `service.Service` and is composed of a sequence of
```

or, alternatively, "comprises"

underlying `service.Service` objects and handles their

> startup/shutdown in a consistent order.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
startup/shutdown in the specified sequential order.
```

> Consensus, blocksync (nee fast sync.), and statesync all depend on

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Consensus, blocksync (*née* fast sync), and statesync all depend on
```

each other, and have significant initialization dependencies that are

> presently encoded in the `node` package, and as part of this change, a

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
presently encoded in the `node` package. As part of this change, a
```

new package/component (likely named `blocks` located at
`internal/blocks`) will encapsulate the initialization of these block
management areas of the code.

> In order to support replacement of a component, a new public function

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
In order to allow components to be replaced, a new public function
```

will be added to the public interface of `node` with a signature that
resembles the following:

```go
func NewWithServices(conf *config.Config,
	logger log.Logger,
	cf proxy.ClientCreator,
	gen *types.GenesisDoc,
	srvs []service.Service,
) (service.Service, error) {
```

> The `service.Service` objects will be initialized in the order their
> supplied, after all pre-configured/default services have started (and
> shut down first, comparatively.) If any of the services implement
> additional interfaces, that allow them to replace specific default
> services. `NewWithServices` will validate input service lists with the
> following rules:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The `service.Service` objects will be initialized in the order supplied, after
all pre-configured/default services have started (and shut down in reverse
order).  The given services may implement additional interfaces, allowing them
to replace specific default services. `NewWithServices` will validate input
service lists with the following rules:
```

> - no running services

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- None of the services may already be running.
```

> - for replacing default services, callers cannot supply more than
>   one replacement reactor for any specified type.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- The caller may not supply more than one replacement reactor for a given
  default service type.
```

If callers violate any of these rules, `NewWithServices` will return
an error.

## Consequences

### Positive

- The node package will become easier to maintain.

- It will become easier to add additional services within tendermint
  nodes.

- It will become possible to replace default components in the node
  package without vendoring the tendermint repo and modifying internal
  code.

- The current end-to-end (e2e) test suite will be able to prevent any

>   regressions, and the new functionality can be thoroughly unittested.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
  regressions, and the new functionality can be thoroughly unit tested.
```

> - The scope of this project is very narrow, which minimizes risk and

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- The scope of this project is very narrow, which minimizes risk.
```

If there was another virtue here, I'm not sure what it was.

### Negative

- This increases our reliance on the `service.Service` interface which
  is probably not an interface that we want to fully commit to.

> - This proposal implements a fairly minimal set of functionality and

Reviewer 6: Arguably this is what we just said was positive above, in re: narrow scope. 🙂

  leaves open the possibility for many additional features which are
  not included in the scope of this proposal.

### Neutral

N/A

## Open Questions

- To what extent does this new initialization framework need to accommodate
  the legacy p2p stack? Would it be possible to delay a great deal of this
  work to the 0.36 cycle to avoid this complexity?

>   - Answer: _depends on timing_, and the requirement to ship pluggable
> 	reactors in 0.35.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
  - Answer: _depends on timing_, and the requirement to ship pluggable reactors in 0.35.
```

- Where should additional public types be exported for the 0.35
  release?

>   Related to the general project of API stabilization there is a
>   desire to deprecate the `types` package, and move these public types
>   into a new `pkg` hierarchy; however, the design of the `pkg`
>   interface is currently underspecified. If `types` is going to remain
>   for the 0.35 release, then we should consider the impact of using
>   multiple organizing modalities for this code within a single release.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
  Related to the general project of API stabilization we want to deprecate
  the `types` package, and move its contents into a new `pkg` hierarchy;
  however, the design of the `pkg` interface is currently underspecified.
  If `types` is going to remain for the 0.35 release, then we should consider
  the impact of using multiple organizing modalities for this code within a
  single release.
```

## Future Work

- Improve or simplify the `service.Service` interface. There are some
  pretty clear limitations with this interface as written (there's no

>   way to timeout slow startup or shut down, the cycle between the

Reviewer 6: This could be a good target for context plumbing work. I think I've seen at least one issue touching on that, and we could potentially address it as part of a wider (but separate) context plumbing update. That's something that's probably worth doing before 1.0, but could wait till after this more immediate step.

Author: Yeah, I totally agree. I definitely want to do context plumbing, sometime later this year, but I don't think this proposal is exactly the right place to do it? It's clearly related but I think drawing lines between these kinds of projects is useful.
